---
title: Why I'm A Proud Omnivore
date: 2020-02-07T04:57:44.447Z
description: Working the creativity of dining into my everyday life
---
I used to think chicken was a crutch for a good meal. This philosophy started a year ago when I decided to challenge myself to being vegetarian for one week. I thought it would be difficult. It wasn’t! Being vegetarian was so fun. I was forced to find and try a lot of new recipes, something I hadn’t done since I moved out for college four years ago. I had more fun grocery shopping that I’d had in a while. Instead of seeing cooking for myself as another chore on my list, I saw it as an opportunity to be creative.

After a week of delicious tofu stir fry and yogurt parfaits, I decided to be vegetarian for another month. I was having too much fun! At this point I went to Google and spent a few hours researching all the nerdy diet things I needed to know in order to be healthy and nourished. Did you know that vegetarians have to consume about twice as much protein every day as meat eaters? Plant proteins are more difficult for the body to break down. I also learned creative ways to prepare certain fruits and vegetables. For example, jackfruit “pulled pork” is quite a popular homemade dinner for many vegetarians. I personally didn’t make a lot of imitation meat dishes. I focused more on enjoying all the flavor that fruits, nuts, and vegetables have to offer. My favorite food now is this [Moroccan lentil stew](https://www.ambitiouskitchen.com/butternut-squash-chickpea-lentil-moroccan-stew/). I make it about once a month, and I never get tired of it. The chickpeas go perfectly with the turmeric and cinnamon. Also if you make your own veggie broth from scraps and spices, it costs around $10 to make!

One of my favorite parts of being vegetarian was the opportunity to eat carbohydrates several times a day without feeling too guilty. Carbs are my favorite food group. After years of restricting carbs, I was so happy to finally have a reason to eat as many as I wanted. Without meat or dairy in my diet, carbs were essential for healthy energy levels. Of course, I still ate all whole grains because (surprise) whole grains are a nice way to sneak in some extra protein.

I ended up being vegetarian for about eight months. I was practically vegan for half that time, seeing as I found out I was lactose intolerant half way through my plant-based diet challenge. I took that news pretty hard, but eventually found new ways to enrich my menu with fats such as coconut milk, cashews, and avocados. Cheese and butter, like chicken, were a secret crutch of mine that was soon eradicated. If there was a week I just couldn’t do without cheese, there were plenty of “vegan” cheese recipes on Pinterest to try. My favorite is the **[pumpkin cashew](https://playswellwithbutter.com/vegan-pumpkin-mac-and-cheese/)** one that that my fiance, Jeff, found for me. However, I've found that no imitation cheese can beat a nice helping of avocado or olive oil.

Today I’m back to being a regular ‘ol omnivore. I woke up one morning and a freshly grilled burger was calling my name. I eat what I crave when I crave it, which is way more fun than denying myself a nice bagel or some fried chicken. That’s something that being “vegan” taught me. It’s ok, and even healthy, to indulge in my cravings. Cutting out meat and dairy from my menu was a fun challenge. I found that I looked forward more to grocery shopping and cooking simply because I was breaking away from the everyday meals that I had eaten my entire life. Food is one of my favorite ways to work creativity into my day. Because, if I am what I eat, why not eat something inspiring and delicious?

If you want to add a little creativity to your life, you can start by following my veggie board on Pinterest here!: <https://www.pinterest.com/caterpillarbutt/all-the-veggies/>
